---
title: An eventful weekend
author: cpbotha
type: post
date: 2003-04-21T22:33:34+00:00
url: /2003/04/21/an-eventful-weekend/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
tags:
  - ardenne
  - beer
  - rochefort
  - tenneville
  - trappist beer

---

Much happened this weekend. Because many readers have fantastically short
attention spans, I'll break my report up into clearly marked sections.
  
## Is my laptop hard drive defective?

My laptop has done this once before: after the laptop is switched on, the hard
drive refuses to start. It's usually very quiet, but definitely audible at
startup. This weekend before we left for Belgium (more on this later) the
laptop decided it was time for the "the hard drive can't be bothered to start
up" trick again. No amount of restarts, reboots, hard drive reseats (yes, I
_do_ mean "reseat") and cursing seems to remedy this. When I returned today
(i.e. after almost 4 days of rest and relaxation for both me and the hard
drive) it started up without a hitch.

I haven't been able to find very much information on the Toshiba MK3018GAS hard
drive and its issues. Maybe I'm just lucky to have that one _special_ hard
drive.

## A toothbrush. I am.

We spent this weekend in the south of Belgium, in a [little town][1] almost in
the middle of nowhere. Yes, it has its own frikking website.

In anycase, Tenneville is in a French-speaking province. My French is atrocious
on the best of days, so I had the pleasure of some extremely entertaining
conversations with some of the native francophones. I am glad to say that
during the weekend, simply because no-one speaks a word of English and one or
two exceptions can manage a few phrases of Flemish (i.e. Dutch), my French
glands got so much exercise that I experienced a significant improvement.

I will definitely take more time to watch TV5 and one day I shall do my
erstwhile French teacher proud!

## Ardenne ham and abbey beer

Everybody knows and accepts that Belgian beers rule the earth. Those who don't
are profoundly stupid. It's also widely accepted that the better Belgian beers
are made by monks in their abbeys. Bless their souls. This weekend my beer
glands transcended to the next level of consciousness as I imbibed the
[Trappistes Rochefort Numero 8][2].

Just to demonstrate that some people are endowed with unfair amounts of kharma,
I was having some of the finest hams in the world whilst sipping this divine
beer. You can do the same: just mosy on down to [La Roche-en-Ardenne][3] (close
by Tenneville) and walk into a suitable charcuterie. Work with the waitress on
the rest.

## Water is wet

To conclude an already perfect weekend, we kayaked down l'Ourthe (the river
running through La Roche). The bastards at the kayak place conveniently forgot
to warn us about that last rapid. We succeeded in shooting over the thing
without overturning the kayak, but took so much water that not capsizing
actually became an academic distinction.

## The Belgian Ardenne

... is highly recommended. Go there. :)

## Post Scriptum

It struck me this weekend to what an extent 21st century technology has
permeated our lives. I telephoned my mother whilst lying on a grassy hill in
front of the house that we rented in Tenneville. When my mother answered, she
explained that they were on a mountain top on the southern-most tip of the
African continent. The fact that I could hear a crystal-clear reproduction of
her voice more than 10000km away and communicate with her in real-time on a
cheap consumer device is quite astounding, don't you think?

 [1]: http://www.tenneville.be/
 [2]: http://www.belgianstyle.com/mmguide/example/label.php3?img=rochfort.gif&beer=Rochefort+8
 [3]: http://www.laroche.be/
